

# Page 1

12.3 Traction on Snow
12.3.1 Dif ﬁculty in Improving Tire Performance for a Wide
Range of Road Conditions
Vehicles are driven in various road conditions, such as dry, wet, icy and snowy road
conditions. Tire manufactures are thus required to improve the tire performance for a
wide range of road conditions. The improvement of one characteristic is not dif ﬁcult
in terms of present conventional tire technology. However, the improvement of one
characteristic often means the quality of another characteristic decreases.
As an example, a studless tire, which is a winter tire without studs, has a speci ﬁc
performance on an icy or snowy surface [ 5, 53–63]. However, it is dif ﬁcult to
improve the tire performance on ice and snow at the same time. Figure 12.50 shows
this incompatibility dilemma relating to the void ratio of a tire, which is the ratio of
the void area and the area of the tire footprint. When the void ratio of a tire
increases, the tire traction on snow increases, but the tire traction on ice decreases
owing to the reduction of the contact area between the tire and ice. Although the
void ratio is an important tire design parameter, the incompatibility dilemma cannot
be solved by changing only this parameter.
12.3.2 Models of Tire Traction on a Snow-Covered Road
Snow is one of the most complicated materials for which to de ﬁne properties, and it
is impossible to observe tire behavior at the interface between snow and a tire. An
experiment that uses an indoor apparatus and arti ﬁcial snow has not yet been
established, and tests on snow performance of a tire have been restricted by
traction on  
snow
traction on ice (−2°C)  
Void ratio   (%)  
0 10 20 30 
Traction (index)
0 
40 
60 
20 
80 
100 
120 
140 
tire pattern
40 50 
Fig. 12.50 Incompatibility
of traction on snow and ice
[60]
850 12 Traction Performance of Tires


# Page 2

seasonal conditions and appropriate test areas. Furthermore, research on tire per-
formance on snow has mainly been qualitative, and it has been dif ﬁcult to apply the
results to tire design. A trial-and-error approach in which many measurements are
made has thus been adopted to improve the tire performance.
Past studies on tire performance on snow examined the conceptual idea of snow
traction [ 22, 61–64], vehicle drivability on snow [ 65, 66], correlation between tire
performance on snow and tire design parameters [ 67, 68], tire testing on snow
[69–71]; measurement of snow characteristics and a simple snow model [ 72–76],
FEA of the snow traction of a tire and rubber block [ 77–85], tracked over snow
vehicles [ 86, 87] and models for snow [ 88–92].
Snow is considered a viscoelastic [ 77] and microstructure-based [ 88, 89]
material. In the previous studies, snow is simpli ﬁed as being elastoplastic, which
means that viscosity is neglected, and homogeneous. Elastoplastic material models
for snow have been studied; e.g., algorithmic approaches of large-strain FEA [ 78,
79], application of an elastoplastic model to numerical analysis in which a single
tread block is deformed on snow [ 80], a two-dimensional analysis of a tire with
lateral grooves rolling on snow [ 81], a three-dimensional analysis of a rigid wheel
with a blank tread tire rolling on snow [ 82], and the measurement of snow char-
acteristics using a shear box device for tire simulation [ 83]. Although there are
many ﬁnite element models of tire traction on snow, they cannot be applied to the
practical tread pattern. Seta et al. [ 84] established a numerical procedure that can be
applied in the prediction of the snow performance of a tire with a practical tread
pattern. Choi et al. [ 85] studied the same topic following Seta ’s approach.
12.3.3 Analytical Model of Tire Traction
on a Snow-Covered Road
(1) Friction mechanisms of rubber on snow
Ella et al. [ 64] proposed four friction mechanisms of rubber on snow as shown in
Fig. 12.51.
(i) A reaction force opposes sliding through indentation at both microscopic and
macroscopic levels (Fig. 12.51a).
(ii) An adhesive force is generated by van der Waals bonds, which are stretched
and broken as the position 1, 2 and 3, respectively (Fig. 12.51b).
(iii) A plowing force is generated by both plowing and surface friction
(Fig. 12.51c).
(iv) The melted water layer provides lubrication, which reduces friction, and the
thickness of the water layer increases as the time that the snow grain spends
in contact with the rubber increases (Fig. 12.51d).
12.3 Traction on Snow 851


# Page 3

(2) Analytical model of tire traction on a snow-covered road
(2-1) Analytical model of tire traction on a snowy road
Nakajima [ 61] developed an analytical model of the longitudinal traction of a tire
on snow by extending Browne ’s qualitative model [ 22]. The mechanical charac-
teristics of snow were included in the model to quantitatively predict the tire
traction on snow. The model consists of four forces as shown in Fig. 12.52.
(i) FB is the braking force due to compressing snow ahead of the contact patch.
It can be analytically estimated from the tire geometry, snow depth and
properties of snow that determine the sinking depth of a tire into snow. This
force is not included in the friction mechanism of rubber on snow in the
previous section.
(ii) F
S is the shear force in snow. Snow is packed into a void by the rolling
motion of the tire and is compressed by vertical loading. Snow can sustain a
shear force because its shear strength is increased by this vertical compres-
sion. This shear stress, which is within the limits of the snow ’s shear
strength, is produced by a complex interaction between the tire tread pattern
and snow. The shear stress distribution in snow will vary if the tread pattern
or the snow conditions, such as the snow depth and density, are different.
This force is not included in the friction mechanism of rubber on snow in the
previous section.
(iii) F
l is a frictional force acting between tire tread and snow surfaces. It is
controlled by the friction coef ﬁcient of the tread rubber and the actual contact
Fig. 12.51 Schematic diagrams of friction mechanisms of rubber on snow (reproduced from Ref.
[64] with the permission of Tribol. Int. )
852 12 Traction Performance of Tires


# Page 4

area between the tire and snow. Fl can be approximately estimated from the
sliding frictional force of a locked smooth tire on compacted snow. This
force is treated as the other friction mechanisms of rubber on snow except a
plowing force in the previous section.
(iv) F
D is the plowing force at the block and sipe edges, which is also called the
edge effect. These edges dig into the snow surface as the tire rolls. Because
this plowing force is strongly related to the number of sipes, the edge effect
can be roughly estimated from the edge length of the tread pattern. This force
is treated as a plowing force in the friction mechanism of rubber on snow in
the previous section.
The traction force at a small slip ratio is expressed by
Tractive force on snow in small slip ratio ¼ F
S þ Fl þ FD /C0 FB: ð12:91Þ
At a large slip ratio, the shear force of snow in a void, FS, makes no contribution to
the tractive force because FS is generated only when a tire ’s shear stress is lower
than the shear strength of snow. FS becomes small under high slip conditions
because of the snow fractures. This assumption is validated by the shear force
becoming constant immediately after the shear rupture of snow in a shear box test
[83]. The braking force due to compression, F
B, makes no contribution to the
traction force because the tire does not move forward. As a result, the tractive force
at a large slip ratio is expressed as
Tractive force on snow in large slip ratio ¼ F
l þ FD: ð12:92Þ
Ploughing force: FD 
（Edge effect）
sipe
Shear force of snow in void : FS Frictional force: Fμ
Braking force owing to 
snow compression : FB 
Fig. 12.52 Schematic ﬁgure of tire traction on snow [ 61]
12.3 Traction on Snow 853


# Page 5

In the same way, the braking force on snow is expressed as
Braking force on snow in small slip ratio ¼/C0 ð FS þ Fl þ FD þ FBÞ; ð12:93Þ
Braking force on snow in large slip ratio ¼/C0 ð Fl þ FD þ FBÞ; ð12:94Þ
where the minus sign indicates a braking force. FS makes no contribution to the
braking force at a large slip ratio.
A typical relationship between the tractive force on snow and the slip ratio is
shown in Fig. 12.53. The snow traction coef ﬁcient is the ratio of the tractive force
on snow and normal load and depends on the pattern design and slip ratio. In tests,
patterns have been grooved on tires made of the same compound. The traction
coefﬁcient becomes a maximum at slip ratios ranging from 20 to 30%. This is
because the traction increases with the slip ratio owing of the increase in shear
deformation, but no shear force of snow in a void is generated at a high slip ratio.
The difference between the blocked and blank treaded tire is due to the shear force
in the void, which is larger at a slip ratio less than 30% and disappears at a large slip
ratio. At a small slip ratio, snow in the void holds a traction force because the shear
stress of snow in a void is less than the shear strength of snow, while the snow loses
the traction force at a large slip ratio because the snow in the void is fractured. The
difference between the block with sipes and the solid block is the plowing force,
because the plowing force affects the traction force at all slip ratios.
(2-2) Evaluation of the four forces
The four forces in Eq. ( 12.91) are evaluated by considering snow characteristics
that are determined in a compression test as a function of snow density. The braking
force, F
B, is calculated from the compressive force of snow in the leading region of
FFS
FD
FS
Slip ratio
0 0.5 1.0
0 
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4Snow traction coefficient
block with sipes
block
blank tread
Fig. 12.53 Tire traction on
snow and the slip ratio [ 84]
854 12 Traction Performance of Tires


# Page 6

a tire. The frictional force of a tire on snow, Fl, is assumed to be expressed by the
Amonton–Coulomb law measured by a sliding test of a tire with blank tread. The
maximum shear force of snow in a void, FS, is expressed by
FS ¼
Z
Ay
sðqÞdAy; ð12:95Þ
where s(q), q and Ay are the shear strength of snow, the density of snow and the
contact area of voids on a tire footprint. Because the shear strength of snow is a
function of the density of snow [ 86, 87], the density of snow in a void is estimated
from the measured void shrinkage of a tire. The measured void volume of a tire
shrinks when the voids enter the area of the footprint, does not change in the area of
the footprint and recovers when voids exit the area of the footprint as shown in
Fig. 12.54. Hence, the density of snow must be greater in the area of the footprint
than in other areas.
Assume that the relationship between the compressed snow density in the area of
the footprint ( q) and the undisturbed snow density on the road ( q
0) is expressed by
q ¼ f q0; Vol=Vol0ðÞ ; ð12:96Þ
where Vol and Vol 0 are, respectively, the void volumes inside and outside the
footprint, and Vol/Vol 0 is the void shrinkage.
Suppose that the shear area of a void in a footprint, Ay, can be calculated as
Ay ¼ A0 /C1Vol=Vol0; ð12:97Þ
contact area
Void shrinkage: 
Vol0 / Vol 
1.0
2.0
0 
Vol0 Vol 
before contact
after contact
r olling
θ
Position in contact area
Fig. 12.54 Void deformation around the contact area [ 61]
12.3 Traction on Snow 855


# Page 7

where A0 is the area of voids in an unloaded tire. Substituting Eqs. ( 12.96) and
(12.97) into Eq. ( 12.95) where the shear strength of the snow s(q) is obtained from
the measurement in Ref. [ 72], we obtain the relationship between FS and Vol/Vol 0
as shown in Fig. 12.55. The shear strength of snow s(q) increases with Vol/Vol 0,
while the shear area of the void Ay decreases with Vol/Vol 0. FS thus reaches a
maximum at a certain Vol/Vol 0 value. This indicates that there is an optimum void
shrinkage, which may be controlled by the tire pattern, construction or sidewall
shape.
The plowing force or edge effect is generated by the edges of blocks and sipes.
Referring to Eq. ( 12.92), the plowing force per unit edge length can be estimated
from the tractive forces at a slip ratio of 1.0 where tires have two types of pattern
with different edge lengths. Assuming that the frictional force F
l is not changed
even by adding sipes to a tire and the force per unit edge length of the sipe is the
same as the per unit edge length of the block, the plowing force per unit edge length
is estimated to be about 10 N/mm on packed snow having density from 0.3 to 0.5 in
the top layer of the snow cover. The plowing force is calculated as
F
D ¼ 10 /C2 total edge length in the footprintðÞ ; ð12:98Þ
where the unit of FD is Newton and the edge length is the lateral component of the
edge and has the unit of millimeters.
(3) Validation of the analytical model of tire traction on a snow-covered road
The static traction of practical tires is predicted using Eq. ( 12.91), and the pre-
diction is compared with measurements. The measurement was carried out one day
after snowfall, with the snow density ranging from 0.3 to 0.5 in the top layer of the
snow cover. Figure 12.56 shows that the measurement of the static traction (index)
is in good agreement with the prediction. Figure 12.57 shows that the measurement
Vol0 
Vol 
0.5
1 
1.5
2 
2.5
3 
3.5
4 
Shear force of snow in void (index)1 2 3 4 
Void shrinkage
Fig. 12.55 Shear force of
snow in a void versus void
shrinkage [ 61]
856 12 Traction Performance of Tires


# Page 8

of the tractive force with a slip ratio of 1.0 is in good agreement with the prediction
made using Eq. ( 12.92).
Assuming that the frictional force Fl and plowing force FD do not change with
snow type, the contributions of the four forces are estimated. Figure 12.58 shows
the contribution of the four forces to the static snow traction of the tire indicated by
an asterisk in Fig. 12.56. The contributions of the shear force of snow in a void F
S
and the frictional force Fl are larger in the case of fresh snow. To consider the effect
of snow type on traction, tractions are calculated to compare for fresh and aged
snow. The contributions of F
B and FS to the traction are larger for fresh snow than
for aged snow. The reason for the large contribution of FB to traction in fresh snow
is that the tire sinks more in fresh snow than in aged snow. Meanwhile, the reason
for the large contribution of FS to the traction in fresh snow is that the shear strength
of fresh snow is more sensitive than that of aged snow to the density.
70
80
90
100
110
Measured traction (index)
1.2 1.25 1.3 1.35 1.4 1.45
Predicted traction (kN) 
R=0.92
experiment：new snow
prediction：fresh snow
＊
205/70R14
Fig. 12.56 Comparison of
the prediction and
measurement of static snow
traction [ 61]
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Measured traction (index)
0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1.0
Predicted traction (kN) 
R=0.79
205/70R14
experiment：new snow
prediction：fresh snow
Fig. 12.57 Comparison of
the prediction and
measurement of snow traction
at a slip ratio of 1.0 [ 61]
12.3 Traction on Snow 857


# Page 9

12.3.4 FEA of Tire Traction on Snow
(1) Numerical modeling of snow
Seta et al. [ 84] ﬁrst comprehensively analyzed the tractive force of a tire with a
practical tread pattern on snow employing computational mechanics. They focused
on the shear force of snow in a void (as in Fig. 12.52), which is produced by
complex interaction between the tire tread pattern and snow. FEA using a
Lagrangian mesh and the ﬁnite volume method (FVM) using an Eulerian mesh
were employed to model the tire and snow, respectively. The interaction between
the tire and snow was calculated on the basis of general coupling, which allows the
interaction between the Lagrangian mesh and Eulerian mesh to be calculated
automatically. The Mohr –Coulomb yield model was used for elastoplasticity
11:
s ¼ c þ r tan /; ð12:99Þ
where s is the shear stress, c is cohesion, / is the internal friction angle, and r is the
stress normal to the shear surface. The Mohr –Coulomb yield model with cohesion
of 0.016 MPa and an internal friction angle of 31° was used for snow.
The Mohr –Coulomb yield model for snow was validated by comparing the
numerical simulation of the shear box test to Ref. [ 78] in which the Cam-Clay yield
model was used for snow. The device of the shear box test consists of upper and
lower bits as shown in Fig. 12.59. The upper bit is compressed while the upper and
lower bits are sheared at the slit. It is observed that the deformation and distribution
of the plastic strain of Mohr –Coulomb yield model are similar to those of the
−0.5
0 
0.5
1 
Traction force (kN)
F B F D F μF S 
Traction force (kN)F B F D F μF S 
(a) Fresh snow (b) Aged snow
205/70R14
Fresh snow: snow stored for 1 day in cold-storage room at –13ºC
Aged snow: snow stored for 14 day in cold-storage room at –13ºC
−0.5
0 
0.5
1 205/70R14
Fig. 12.58 Contributions of calculated four forces to static snow traction [ 61]
11Note 12.5.
858 12 Traction Performance of Tires


# Page 10

Cam-Clay yield model. The relationships between horizontal displacement and
shear stress of snow are shown in Fig. 12.60. Although the peak shear stress
simulated in this study is higher than the peak shear stress in the experiment and
ﬁnite element simulation in Ref. [ 78], the results are in good qualitative agreement.
(2) FEA of tire traction on snow
A numerical simulation is conducted to predict the snow performance of a tire with
a practical tread pattern. Sipes and the friction coef ﬁcient between the tire and snow
surfaces are ignored because this simulation is focused on predicting the shear force
of snow in a void. The appearance of the predicted snow surface and a comparison
σy
u = 2.5 mm, σy = 25 kPa,
Size 54 x 60 (slit width 4) mm
u 
(a)  Cam-Clay yield model (b)  Mohr-Coulomb yield model
Fig. 12.59 Comparison of deformation and the distribution of plastic strain in shear box tests
(*ﬁgure (a) refers to Ref. [ 78]) [ 84]
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Displacement (mm)
Shear stress τ ( kPa)
simulation in Seta’s study
experiment in ref. *
FE-simulation in ref. *
Fig. 12.60 Relationship
between horizontal
displacement and the shear
stress in shear box tests (*data
are taken from Ref. [ 78]) [84]
12.3 Traction on Snow 859


# Page 11

with the snow-covered road surface are shown in Fig. 12.61. The track of the tread
pattern is observed on the predicted snow surface, which is in good qualitative
agreement with a photograph.
One advantage of numerical simulation is that we can make visible what we
cannot observe in an experiment. For example, the predicted shear stress distri-
bution of a tire on snow can be predicted as shown in Fig. 12.62. The shear stress is
mainly generated at the lateral grooves of the tread pattern. A comparison of the
(a) Predicted snow surface (b) Photograph of snow road surface
Fig. 12.61 Appearance of the predicted snow surface and a snow-covered road surface [ 84]
(a) Predicted snow surface (b) Predicted shear stress distribution
at contact patch
Fig. 12.62 Predicted deformation of snow and the shear stress distribution in the contact patch
[84]
860 12 Traction Performance of Tires


# Page 12

shear stress distributions of tires with various pattern designs shows that the new
tread pattern can be effectively designed by simulation.
(3) Validation of predictability
The predictability of simulation was validated by comparing experimental results
with the prediction for several basic tread patterns. The tire size was 195/65R15, the
inﬂation pressure was 200 kPa, the load was 4.0 kN, the velocity was 60 km/h, and
the slip ratio was 30%. Figure 12.63 shows the effect of the lateral groove width of
a tire where circumferential grooves have the same width while lateral grooves have
narrow and wide widths. The average tractive force on snow increased with the
width of lateral groves in both prediction and experiment.
Figure 12.64 shows tire patterns used to investigate the effect of the lug angle on
tire traction on snow. The lug angles were 0°, 30° and −30° measured from the
lateral direction. Figure 12.65 compares the traction of tires with various lug angles
between prediction and measurement. The prediction shows the same tendency as
the experimental results. However, the prediction of the snow braking force of a tire
with 0°-lugs is higher than that of a tire with −30°-lugs, while the experiment shows
(a) Narrow grooves (b) Wide grooves
Fig. 12.63 Effect of the groove width on tire traction on snow [ 84]
(a) Angle 0 deg (b) Angle 30 deg (c) Angle −30 deg
direction of
rotation
Fig. 12.64 Effect of the lug angle on tire traction on snow [ 84]
12.3 Traction on Snow 861


# Page 13

the opposite trend. Although the tractive force is mainly produced in a void, the
braking force is mainly produced ahead of the contact patch owing to the com-
pression of snow. Although there are still differences, the prediction is in good
qualitative agreement with the experimental results.
12.4 Traction on Ice
12.4.1 Studies on Friction on Ice
The model of friction on ice is well documented in the book of Petrenko and
Whiteworth [ 93], the book of Maeno [ 94] and the paper of Kietz [ 95]. The friction
of rubber on ice has been studied by many researchers [ 96–101]. The mechanism of
the low friction on ice has been explained by pressure melting, but the accepted idea
today is frictional heating [ 96]. The low friction on ice is explained by a
quasi-liquid layer on the surface of ice having low shear strength at approximately
0 °C as shown in Fig. 12.66. The depth of a quasi-liquid layer monotonically
decreases with decreasing temperature from a maximum at the melting point as
shown in Fig. 12.67.
Figure 12.68 shows the friction coefﬁcient of ice on ice with respect to speed and
temperature. The coef ﬁcient of kinetic friction on ice is closely related to the
thickness of the lubricating layer produced during sliding. At very low velocities
and temperatures, there is little melted water on the ice surface, and the adhesive
shear deformation of ice thus contributes to the friction on ice. At higher velocities
and loads, the enhanced frictional heating, which accounts for the existence of the
lubricating layer, increases the thickness of the melted water and quasi-liquid layer.
This increase in thickness reduces friction. The depth of the quasi-liquid layer can
be described as a function of the difference between the ice temperature T
ice and
melting temperature Tm [101]:
(b) Braking condition
0
50
100
150
Prediction Experiment
Tractive force on snow (index)
0 deg
30 deg
−30 deg
0
50
100
150
Prediction Experiment
Braking force on snow (index) 0 deg
30 deg
−30 deg
(a) Tractive condition
Fig. 12.65 Comparison of predictions and measurements (effect of the lug angle) [ 84]
862 12 Traction Performance of Tires